This project explored the impacts of a novel plant on the frosted elfin butterfly's (Callophrys irus) behavior and fitness

Abstract: Herbivorous insects share a complex evolutionary relationship with their host plants. The introduction of a non-native plant changes plant community composition, which in turn effects the lepidoptera that feed on the plants. The non-native Lupinus polyphyllus has spread across New England and now occurs in spaces dedicated to pollinator conservation. I conducted oviposition preference and larval performance experiments with C. irus, L. polyphyllus, and its native host plant in the same genus Lupinus perennis, to investigate how specialist lepidoptera are impacted following the introduction of L. polyphyllus. My results found L. polyphyllus decreased C. irus larval fitness and survival, indicating the legume had nutritional deficiencies and does not provide the same benefits as the native host plant. While several lepidoptera have shifted to using non-native plants as alternative hosts, the long-term impacts remain unclear. I modeled a real world population of C. irus to discover what could happen if L. polyphyllus replaced L. perennis. From the model, we can anticipate a severe drop in C. irus population size regardless of the amount of L. polyphyllus because it outcompetes the native L. perennis and does not provide the same quality of nutrition. These results emphasize the importance of planting ecologically beneficial plants in pollinator conservation. 

This repository includes
[AreaEstimate.R] -> uses NHFG lupine transect data to estimate the area of L. perennis (for parameter estimation in Model.R)
[Model.R] -> models the impact of a L. polyphyllus invasion to a population of C. irus
[Statistics.R] -> analyses the oviposition preference and larval performance (development + survival) of C. irus between L. perennis and L. polyphyllus
